### AGAINST A BINARY WORLD SYSTEM

The world is full of binaries. Everything must have a counterpart; everything exists and defines itself only through its opposition. Either you are right or left, you are a ‘man or a woman’, you are ‘human and not nature’, you have a ‘body and a mind’—two things facing each other. No matter where you look, everything is binary. Why it is so, no one knows anymore; it just is. We think in binaries, without exception. We start separating our emotions into ‘positive and negative’, begin to polarize ourselves. We have a ‘devil and an angel’ in the world and on our shoulders. In architectural studies, we encounter binaries such as ‘inside and outside’, ‘landscape and city’, ‘hard and soft’. ‘Black and white’ thinking. ‘We plan; others use’. It seems as if dualistic thinking is the only way to perceive and categorize the world abstractly, as if we must repeatedly take two positions with others or in myself and discuss until one side prevails, until there is only one path/ one solution left. The ‘one opinion science’ in which one Argument is the ‘scientific one and the others the non-scientific’. The problems of this worldview are growing. The climate crisis can’t be overcome by a one-way solution. It has to be diverse, it has to be local but at the same time worldwide, there have to be different answers. The category ‘sustainable and not sustainable’ is not fitting, often it’s something in between. The world is something in between our understanding. It does not fit into our fixed placements, yet our compulsion to categorize and break everything down is greater. Can we not endure the complexity, acknowledge multiple truths, and savor the unknown? Judith Butler have shown in her book ‘Gender trouble’, by analyzing that the category sex is as well as the category gender only an expression , that we have to challenge the category’s itself. Is the problem behind binary thinking the fixed categories we produce or is it the binary thinking process in itself?

Is there an ideology behind a binary thinking? What is the foundation it’s build up from? In their book ‘Life Isn't Binary’ Mag-John Barker and Alex Iantaffi examined many different binaries and revealed an underlying binary that seems crucial—the division into the “foundational binary: us/them” (p.187). This ‘ingroup/outgroup’ binary underlies racism, sexism, and all relationship conflicts between humans, as well as conflicts between humans and other living beings. The underlying ideology behind a binary thinking is that there something differentiable between two things, which make up two poles arranged on one scale. We break down the complexity of others into individual parts to separate them from parts of us. Through this we abstract a living being into something understandable and dehumanize it, withdraw their complexity. By breaking our self into parts we can compare we are beginning to categorize ourselves, breaking ourselves down to a position and evaluating ourselves. Thatwise we dehumanize not only ‘the other’ but also ourselves: “When we start to divide the world into us and them, we not only enter conflict with one another, we also enter into deep conflict with our own selves” (p.100). In doing so, we colonize, arrogating the right to exert power over others. We learn to make opposites out of ‘slaves and humans’, out of ‘Black and White’, and we fail to explore any other way of dealing with complexity than breaking it down so that they become objects. Is the ideology of dividing really this reasonable as we thought?

As supporters of non-binary ways of thinking, we underline that there are not two axes or two mutually exclusive variables. There may be a ‘you and the others’, but these are not opposites, not two sides. The world is more complex than you think. You may have started to recognizing within yourself the different perspectives and voices; you should begin to rediscover your facets to better perceive everyone around you. Even within yourself, you are not consistent, so why demand that from other beings? There are different opinions within you; accept that and embrace these multiversal perspectives. You don’t have to rate same on scale, you don’t have to put axes on them and line them up. Be sure about, they can’t be lined up. All these different opinions are equally valid and should be respected. Surely you can give them an importance for you, but in itself they have no rating, it’s the way you are dealing with them. Black is not the Opposite of White and there is not such a thing as a universal ‘positive feeling neither a negative’ one, you have a variety of different feelings and non of them are always attached to that same one pole of ‘negative and positive’. If you feel melancholic it’s a feeling in itself and has nothing to do with other feelings as feeling happy, frustrated and so on. And in no way it has something to do with ‘positive or negative’. Without framing them on a scale you can gain more diverse feelings and reveal the blind spots in between. In fact there will be no in between anymore. One last point has to be stated correctly: to respect all the opinions equally should not be connected to the ‘freedom of speech’ phrases used by right-wing/fascist ideologist to hide. Such radical viewpoints are not to be acknowledged in open discussion. However, non-binary thinking can foster acceptance and possibly bring opinions closer together, preventing stronger radicalization.

As supporters of non-binary thinking, we are aware that the knowledge within our Western culture is inconceivable without binary constructs. Binarities, dualism, oppositions, and abstraction have been inevitable constructs for the transmission and the earning of knowledge over centuries. No one socialized in a Western culture can think completely free from them, if that is even possible. We use categories to make the world comprehensible, to convey different perspectives on the world, and to interact with other worldviews. Breaking down all categories/ all binarities may seem absurd and impossible. Mag-John Barker and Alex Iantaffi state in their book ‘Life Isn't Binary’: ‘This does not mean that there aren't 'opposites,' because there are; it just means that there are more than only polarizing forces in the world’. But to challenge your worldview by revealing the binary’s can lead to knowledge never thought of before.

To challenge our binary worldview Mag-John Barker and Alex Iantaffi suggest to this “requires us to move away from the rigid binary of either/or—which closes down possibilities—to consider a binary [of both/and] that opens up more possibilities” (p.202). The ‘both/and’ approach can get the seemingly opposite poles closer together. You will understand the functionality of both sides and hence the sides will not have so many opposites anymore and you will find connections between them you’ve not thought of before. In addition to the ‘both/and’ approach, Mag-John Barker and Alex Iantaffi also mention the ‘Opening up/closing down’ strategy, which involves not determining on which side you are on and staying open to alternative approaches, as well to stay open to your self deciding differently than assumed. Furthermore, they describe the strategies of ‘embracing uncertainty’ practiced by Buddhists. You can’t categorize everything into boxes. If something is not fitting you don’t have to make up a new box, let it stay unclear and fussy, maybe it reveals even clearer through this. The last method to get closer with non-binary thinking is the method of ‘multiversal perspectives’. This understanding of the world based on indigenous knowledge that appreciates multiple realities, stories, and possibilities and subsequently challenging the Eurocentric view (cf. p. 207-211).

In his book "Sand Talk" Tyson Yunkaporta describes how the indigenous peoples of Australia have dealt with diversity. Earning and spreading knowledge are fundamentally different processes in indigenous culture. Open, respectful conversation is a key component of earning knowledge, rather than a heated debate between two political parties. Tyson Yunkaporta outlines four main elements of earning and spreading knowledge, that makes knowledge in his point of view more sustainable. The first key element is the knowledge of diversity, we already discussed enough. Secondly and really important for Yunaporta is the interaction. Only through interaction we can face the variety of the world and get to know more facets. Interaction needs to be equally and without underlying powerstructures, to archive knowledge. You have to be in a connection/ in a bond with the ‘other’ you interact with. That is described as the third main element. In this way, a sustainable network is built where diverse opinions can exist and be respected. As the last element, Tyson Yunkaporta describes adaptation. He states that: ‘one should be willing to be changed by the interaction with other actors and by the knowledge that comes from them’ (SCOBEL [online]). All this elements of the indigenous knowledge-process can help us challenging crisis today and to reveal ideology’s that burned into our knowledge-process even before we knew. It also shows that different earnings and spreading of knowledge is possible in community’s. It is possible to have a different understanding of knowledge, it is possible to think non-binary.
 

Sources:
-	Butler, Judith. Gender trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge, 1990.
-	Barker, Mag-John and Iantaffi, Alex. Life isn’t binary: on being both, beyond, and in-between. London and Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2019.
-	Scobel, Gert. So hilft uns indigenes Wissen [online] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4UaMpvfsOOY [accesed on 23.01.2024]
-	Miller, Brilliant. Sand Talk: Changing the World through Indigenous Knowledge with Tyson Yunkaporta [online] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JCzlgBbv5OY [accesed on 23.01.2024]</font>

